In His goodness God preserved me from becoming depressed or impatient out of misery or sorrow. Whatever anyone did for me I Considered it good and whatever was not done for me I tried to endure also for God’s sake. I spent almost the whole of Lent in great pain. After Easter I regained my health so that I could follow the nuns in choir and everywhere else with delight and joy. The sorrow for my sister was so diminished that I was able to give her over to Godgladly. I began to experience more vividly the grace of God inwardly and outwardly. Especially when I came to my Lord with a grievous concern standing before the altar in the choir, it was taken away from me by the grace of God. It seemed to me that I was like someone who carries a heavy burden and lays it down. I was troubled when our_ monastery was not doing well in spiritual and material matters or when I saw that someone acted contrary to truth or peace or love or when someone rejoiced over the bad fortune of another or other such things. I suffered the greatest sorrow from this, and it gave me so much pain that I often went away crying. | treated this pain as a gift sent to me by God so that I would recognize that I myself did not yet live goalies to peace, nee and love as I should.

The earth was covered by mounds, representing the sins of men. And the streams were flowing against these mounds.The water was so powerful that it was amazing that these mounds were not broken up by the water. Indeed many remained undis-turbed. When all those that lay in the valley were washed away com-pletely, a beautiful green pasture appeared. I was given to under-stand: Those who lay in the valley were the humble. Then one of our holy women, who is now with God, stood there and said to me, “Seenow that your Lord can show Himself as Lord indeed.””’ Once again in Advent I lay in bed at night. The greatest fear engulfed me so that I did not know what to do. Indeed, God helped me to fall asleep by the greatest grace. And I was in this grace when Iawoke during the same night, but I can not speak about this state ofmine. My Lord Jesus knows that well. Then I got up and felt grace for a long time afterward.

Ever since my sister died I had the habit of maintaining silence from Thursday night until Sunday, for all of Advent and from the day on which the alleluia is no longer sung until Easter.”’ This silence suited me so well that I was set at peace and overcame all things insilence. Once during Lent great desire and powerful grace were given me to serve God more perfectly. I felt how our Lord’s works of love increased powerfully in me. And I desired that my whole body would be full of the signs of love of the holy cross, as many as were possible to be on me, and that each one would be given to me with all its suffering and pain over my entire body.”° Still I desire that there be no member of my body not wounded with the pains of myLord Jesus Christ. I also had great yearning to hear something about the signs of love and works of love because I felt an inner grace-filled attraction toward them. Eight days before Easter the Lord gave me amost severe and unceasing pain. In this agony I heard about the sufferings of our Lord as the four Passion narratives were being read.As a result, I experienced immeasurable sorrow often thinking, “I Can never be happy again.” Frequently I left choir for my cell to see if it would be better there, but it was the same everywhere. Then I Thought it might be better if I received our Lord on Holy Thursday.*"And so it happened. But on Easter Sunday I was deeply depressed.” I thought there was no one on earth less joyful that day than myself. It seemed to me I should abase myself before all others because there was no one who had not spent the holy season better than I. But whenI received our Lord on that day and went before the altar, the burden was lifted from me with great grace and immeasurable sweetness.Grace was granted, which welled up within me through the Name Jesus Christus and through our Lord’s works of love.

I longed for and greatly desired to receive the kiss just as my lord St.Bernard had received it, and to be embraced by the arms of His love and to have my heart be grasped by Him.* This was fulfilled one night when it was revealed to me that God wanted to bring this about. Then I said, “I would like it and wish it in no other way than through all your sufferings.” I was grasped so powerfully that I felt it both while awake and asleep for a long time. In the same Easterseason St. John became dearer to me than before. During the night before the day when the Gospel read is Maria stabat ad monumen-tum, | saw my all-loving Lord Jesus Christ with His Beloved Disci-ple, St. John, who wanted to receive the blessing for the Gospel fromour Lord.’* He came down—both were floating above us in choir—and stood in front of me. My heart was so anxious that I dared not speak.

Now with sweet grace, the desire and the penances I had taken up with the cross and with our Lord’s works of love came to me so strongly one day more than the others, and I often thought, “I will not be able to endure this and continue to live in this way.” I yearn for someone who would instruct me and from whom I would receive real consolation. But it was denied me at that time. All this time I recognized that I was unworthy of the grace of our Lord and also thatI did not make proper use of His grace. And as I have already written,this continued until the solstice. At the same time I was shown a visible image of a loving soul.

When I was told that my brother was coming to see me, I was like someone who had been told a great sorrow, because I was en-trely filled by divine joy and happiness and great wonder about what happened to me, and I was so taken up by my condition that I couldnot pay attention to anything else. Previously I had had the habit of offering up long prayers. Especially I read many psalms. This too decreased now. No longer did I offer up such lengthy prayers. Also I was no longer able to read the psalter. May the abundantly gracious humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ bring His eternal honor to com-pletion in me.”

I mourned as much for her as for my first sister, especially because I had no one to whom I could go and to whom I could confide my concerns. I grieved for her with many tears and fell ill. One night after her death, I was seized by a great fear and I did not know what to do. Then J said to our Lord, “Oh, dear Lord,why are you doing this to me, and leaving me all alone, yet still you do not take away my fear?” And at that moment the fear was taken away from me with great grace so that I could fear nothing then. But my mourning continued until the eve of All Saints’ Day.

Then. the Friend of God came to me—say in all truthfulness that it seemed to me as if God had sent His dear angel in the light of truth.*® When I was told that he was coming I went into choir weep-ing. After that I went to him, but did not go gladly because of my sorrow and lamentation for Adelheid. When I came to him, immea-surable grace coming from him enlightened me and an inner delight of true sweetness proceeded from his words, so that the yearningarose in me to speak with him about all my concerns. Now God is so good that He cannot resist true desire. 

When I left him that evening the grace of God was so alive in me from speaking with him that I could scarcely wait for daybreak in order to visit him again.And a great gift from the gentle richness of God was given to me at the same time: inner, heart-felt joy for a long time so that I felt no sadness and I experienced such an indescribably mysterious lightness of body; I did not even notice my body and it seemed to me as if Iwere floating up. 

My noble Truth, Jesus Christ, knows well that from His good-ness He gave me such great lightness of body that I did not perceive whether I myself even possessed a body. He surrounded me with Hisdivine sweetness and aroused an intense desire in me to live for Himalone in truth. My desire to know what true love for God is, was especially powerful and often I asked our Lady to help me to pray that God would fulfill my yearning.*° I had such great desire that I thought I would gladly have given up my life to receive such love from God. Once after matins while praying my Pater Noster I had this powerful desire. In His goodness God answered me inwardly that He willed to grant me this, indeed so that the whole region would come to know of it. I was alarmed because I was fully content with this secret grace from God about which only the true Friend ofGod knew anything.*' Since God in His goodness wanted to let me know this and he wanted me to cooper-ate with him in faith. I said, “I shall gladly cooperate provided that you intend the honor of God by it.” He answered that he meant it inno other way. I have always found that to be true and I recognize that he leads a truly blameless life. Although I always recognized that he was given to everyone in true divine consolation, yet I desired a true interior infusion of grace from God for him so that his human life would not be filled with worry. Then my blessed sister, who is withGod, came and said to me, “Have no worry about him. If there is anyone on earth who leads the life of the apostles, it is he.”

Yet in this fear I was surrounded by immeasurable grace. I present the following with appeal to nothing but the Truth,Jesus Christ. It happened that I was seized by an interior divine power from God that took away my heart, and I declare this in their Truth who is my Lord Jesus Christ. Since then I have never felt such a thing? Immeasurable sweetness was my lot so that I thought my soul could have been ripped from my body. It came from my heart and I feared for my senses now and then whenever it was so intense. But I was answered by the presence of God with sweet delight, “I am no robber of the senses, I am the enlightener of the senses.”’ I received a great grace from the inner goodness of God: the light of truth of divine understanding. 

The grace of our Lord, was so very powerful in me and was so unknown to my weak sense that I fell down before our Lord and yielded myself to His divine grace. On Wednesday after matins I wanted to say my Pater Noster.Then the Speaking came upon me again with great grace. And I repeated the Name Jesus Christus over and over again. In the midst of this other words were mixed in too, so that I could not say my PaterNoster until Friday. Then I recited it with great grace.

But the grace, lightness,joy, sweetness, and the divine delight never left me. On Friday I had an inner femaden that I might die the next Wednesday. 

He recognized the merciful works of God in me. I revealed all my cares to him as my trusted physician sent to me by God.That happened on Tuesday. The following night went well. I felt nothing in me but the grace of our merciful God with great joy. OnWednesday morning, everything remained the same. But as the morning progressed, the Speaking came to me very powerfully and—with the Speaking—the greatest pain, so that my groaning washeard far from the room. But divine grace and sweetness were never withdrawn from me. I was anointed with holy oil because I myself and all who were with me thought the holy oil would prove useful.

I had strong faith and powerful trust in God; yet, even so, I had a human fear of death. I was no longer sure that I would live and I awaited only the mercy of God to receive my soul. As I lay there I feltinner sweet, divine grace spreading outward through my body. I could feel myself again and came to eres once more with divine grace. Meanwhile the faithful Friend of our Lord and my entire convent had been in great sorrow sense of me. They now rejoice all the more because they had taken great pains for me before God by singing and reading. That Friday I awoke again with great pain and suffering, which was taken away from me again by great divine joy. It Was revealed to me forcefully that our Lord wanted to accomplish in all His friends the words that He spoke to His disciples, “Your sorrow will be changed into joy, etc.”*° The Speaking continued until shortly before Easter so that I could not say my Pater Noster.Whenever I wanted to say that or other prayers that contained intercessions and petitions, the Speaking arose by the powerful grace ofGod, which I could not withstand. At the same time the Name JesusChristus was so forcefully impressed upon me that since that time only prayers in which the Name of Jesus Christ came forth and those concerned with our Lord’s works of love were consoling and appeal-ing to me.

During all of Lent I never went to Mass because of the loud Speak-ing. Particularly, whenever I looked at the place where it had been given me by God and whenever I heard the name Jesus Christ sungor read, the Speaking began. But whenever it begins I am incapable of doing anything other than uttering what the powerful grace of ourLord speaks to me. Whatever anyone says or does to me in the meantime does not move my heart in the least. It is also beyond the grasp of my senses. I can only speak what has just been given to me.Neither can I break off from Speaking until it is God’s will. My LordJesus Christ, the pure Truth, knows what this means. This was com-municated to me powerfully by God: “I am He Himself and I want to accomplish it in you.” And He promised to do me much good then.At the same time God was as present and as tangible in my soul and in my heart and as perceptible in all the power He works in heaven and earth as if I had seen it with my own eyes insofar as this was possible for any human being. And I was also very joyful at the same time.

Ispeak in the Truth, who is my Lord Jesus Christ, that the grace ofGod has never decreased in me because of this. At that time great grace was given to me by God when I received our Lord on such great feast days as Pentecost and the feast of our Lady, All Saints, St.John’s Day, and also for all of Advent and on Christmas Day. On all these feasts I have great grace and immeasurable sweetness and di-vine consolation. Sometimes it comes to me with the usual Speaking,as I wrote earlier, sometimes in silence.My Lord, who is pure Truth, knows well that since that time Ihave withdrawn myself as much as is humanly possible in thought, 

The thought that I did not live as I should, corresponding to the pure truth that is between me and God, disturbed me all the time. Therewere also longer periods of time when nothing worried me, and if anyone said something disagreeable to me I could receive it with joy.Sometimes a spirit of sadness is also given to me, which unsettles me greatly and causes me to cry. When that occurs, it ends with great joy. This happens sometimes six times during my Pater Noster.When it comes it is accompanied by the divine consolation that myLord Jesus Christ gives to me out of true love to increase my reward.

It comes upon me with a feeling of lightness and ends in joy. The whole day I feel an increase of divine grace and bodily strength. Sometimes I look up and see little white lights before me, so that I think day is dawning. But indeed it is not yet day and the shutters are still closed. Then I see the altar and the walls in the celland myself. This is given to me as an image of the peace which Godhas with loving delight in the loving soul, and that same delight the loving soul has for Him.This was also revealed to me in prayer: when I wish to pray for anything that weighs heavily upon my heart or upon the hearts of others, and it seems to me that it is necessary, but then I cannot put it into words except to say, “Lord accomplish your most loving will.”He fulfills many of my dearest wishes; yes, I say truthfully that Henever denies me one. He brings it about in truly divine joy. But whenI wish to pray for the Poor Souls, I can pray with greater desire for one than for others.

Sometimes because of this I could not pray. Then I sat there in the delight of divine joy from matins until prime. Some-times this was given to me so that within me arose the Speaking about which I have written before. Sometimes I was raised up so that I no longer touched the ground. Sometimes it was given to me to sit therein the wonderful joy of divine delight, unable to pray, but I could think about God and say whatever I wished. And with this it went well with me. Now He, from whom all grace flows, knows well what sort of graces there are, but to my human understanding these are incomprehensible. Also my Lord Jesus Christ knows well that Iyearn for the dearest will of God all my life long. Whatever He gives me, I accept gladly. At all times, I desire to die in His love. Sometimes such great love for God takes hold of me that I cannot believe thatGod could ever have been so loved by another human being except by our tenderly beloved Lady and by His Beloved Disciple, St. John,whom I must rightly leave out of consideration. My Lord knows well that even more was given to me then: when I heard the Passion of ourLord taken in vain, I felt bitter sorrow and | thought that we were unworthy to mention it with true devotion. Once more this was also given to me, and it still happens that whenever I hear the Name ofJesus I feel the greatest joy wherever I go. And I wished eternal blessedness for them from whom I heard it. And then I thought, if Iwere not already happily in my monastery, I would gladly remain in it for this reason alone: I heard the Name of Jesus spoken so frequently there.

During the night of the Vigil I heard someone swearing by the holy suffering of my Lord. That happened to me again in the sameway and lasted throughout the year.’? But when I was given to loud exclamations and Outcries by the gentle goodness of God (these were given to me when I heard the holy sufferings spoken about),then I was pierced to the heart and this extended to all my members,and I was then bound and ever more strongly grasped by the Silence.In these cases I sit a long time—sometimes longer, sometimes shorter. After this Its effect rose up to my head and passed on to all my members and broke them violently. Compelled by the same force I cried out loudly and exclaimed. I had no power over myself and was not able to stop theOutcry until God released me from it. Sometimes it grasped me so powerfully that red blood spurted from me. Then such sorrow came over me that I thought I could not endure life for long. It would be a great consolation for me to die of this love. My Lord Jesus Christ showed His ever present help to me: at its passing it left me truly happy in sweet grace and I remained so for two days. During this time | preferred to be alone and did not want to hear what was being said in my presence, because it was revealed to me interiorly that all would go well with me in this way. After this I usually had to lie down for three days or longer.

In that year our Lord sent me His red Friend with great and powerful consolation and with ceca great grace, which I received as soon as he gave me the Holy Body of our Lord. He gave me communion twice during the binding Silence. For this God prepared me inwardly so that I received it without any disruption of my spiri-tual delight. Especially, he gave me our Lord on St. Denis’ Day.''*Then he took leave of me. I felt special great grace on that day when I came to myself and realized that he had left me, but I wished that Godnever be parted from his soul or his heart. After that the Silence increased in me so that it always began on Tuesday at vespers, and I was silent all night until prime. That went on for the whole week until Sunday and continued indeed for fourteen days. Then it took hold of me so strongly that I thought it must let up or I would not be able to live yet another fourteen days. The most sweet and clever binder, Jesus Christ, bound me so powerfully at that time that my hands swelled and death spots appeared on them.

It gave me a sweet inner joy in God and a powerful grasp of truth whenever very hidden things were given to me which I had neither desired nor could desire. Then I felt, in the fullness of grace, that no one can give this except God alone. It illuminated in me the light of true Christian Faith, so that for me all things were comprehensible which are withGod or flow from God. But all my strength and all my power came to me through His most worthy humanity, His truthful life, His holy,and His powerful sufferings, and all my desire to live and to die comes from nothing else. Often, I felt such a strong, powerful grace from my desires that I thought I could not survive from one desire to the next. I felt the sweetest thrusts against my heart with the most powerful grace and the sweetest movements, so that I thought my heart would fly to pieces from His raging love and would like to dissolve from His grace. But then He acted like a clever, knowledge-able lover and withdrew the turbulence from me so that my frail humanity could better bear it. Sometimes the following happens tome: when, because of ignorance, I fear for my human senses, then I am answered as before, “I am not a robber of the senses, | am an enlightener of the-senses.” This is given to me for the faithful, true teacher of our Lord, for whom I long at all times, when I pray thatGod would keep him in His fatherly care: “He is a true joy to my holy Divinity and a sure follower of my holy humanity. He shall delight in me with the cherubim and look on me with the sera-phim.” And,I will give him my tender humanity against all natural weakness,my true pure life against all dark senses, that my divine grace has not yet moved, my ardent love by which all unconverted hearts will be moved through him, and as a firm foundation, the pure truth that teaches him the way that I desire for him out of love, by which he will accomplish my eternal honor. | will draw him into the Incomprehensible Essence of my Holy Godhead in which he shall lose himself out of love for me.'!? And I will lower him into the holy reflection of my Sacred Godhead where he will see my divine honor clearly in the image from which his pure soul has flowed. And I will complete in him what is written there: “The lowly shall be exalted.”’*° I desire this for him because of his great humility. And, in pure truth I am found, with burning loveI am bound, with fervent desire I am compelled, in true purityI am held.'”!Ardently I desired to be any place where no one knew of me except God alone. If that were the will of God, I would gladly assent to it. After my death I want it known by someone, such as my confes-sor, that I remained in my monastery, because as my Lord knows well, I prefer to be in my monastery provided | am not disturbed. Idesire nothing other than detachment from all things and the accom-plishment of His most precious will in me to His eternal honor. I have great desire to be with Him in eternal joy. Oh, that the day still has not yet come! Were it the will of God and to His honor I would gladly die!




